---
layout: post
title:  "Cellular Automata and my meaning of life"
---

### What are Cellular Automata?
Unfortunately I realised while writing this that it is not easy to expain
cellular automata (CA) without images or drawings, and I do not want to add too
many of those to this blog, so I will do a rough job of explaining what they
are, but there may be gaps.

I like wikipedia's description of what a cellular automata (ca) may be, and so
the followng paragraph is largely copied from there:

> A cellular automaton consists of a regular grid of cells, each in one of a
finite number of states, such as on and off. The grid can be in any finite
number of dimensions. For each cell, a set of cells called its neighborhood is
defined relative to the specified cell. An initial state (time t = 0) is
selected by assigning a state for each cell. A new generation is created
(advancing t by 1), according to some fixed  rule that determines the new state
of each cell in terms of the current state of the cell and the states of the
cells in its neighborhood. Typically, the rule for updating the state of cells
is the same for each cell and does not change over time, and is applied to the
whole grid simultaneously, though there are exceptions.

### Life and Cellular Automata
In any given CA, patterns of states in its grid may emerge that have robustness
- the ability to continue the pattern, when other patterns of states interacts
with them. To use an analogy, the human skin is more robust than a piece of
cloth since if both were scratched until a small tear apeared, the skin would
heal (re-create the pattern that was there) while the cloth would not.

What do I want to say?
I want to say that with rules, patterns of states emerge. The patterns that are
most robust will evolve.
Patterns make us, we want to make patterns.

Life as a CA glider and why programming changes matter:
I think of life as emergent patterns of self-replicating or -regulating states
of matter in reality, where matter is the smallest element in reality which can
have a state. An example that seems to make this definition clear for me and 
many othes would be the life in the reality of Conway's game of life (gol).
In gol, life emerges in the form of still lifes, oscilators, and spaceships 
[1]. These patterns can vary greatly in complexity and robustness (the ability
to withstand interaction [2] with other patterns of life in reality). As I said 
earlier it is clear to many that some of the patterns of states in gol seem to
exhibit properties of self-replication or self-regulation and look like they
exhibit life, hence the name: Game of Life.
The same is true in our reality. Certain patterns of states in reality occur
in clumps of reality. Patterns that self-replicate are more likely to exist for
longer, and so too with patterns that are good at self-regulation i.e. 
robustness. Evolution by natural selection is the process of patterns 
interacting with each other and one of the following happens: all interacting
patterns cease to replicate; some patterns continue to replicate while others
don't; a new living pattern emerges.
Given enough time and space, highly robust patterns might emerge, and they
may consist of (or be a part of) living patterns that form a hyper-pattern. This
is what we are: a massive number and complicated series of patterns that emerged
to make an extremely robust hyper-pattern, the human.
I'm a computer scientist who has not studied any of the hard sciences 
formally, so there will likely be gaps in the following summary, but here are
a few layers of pattern formation on the path to a human pattern:
quark, atom, molecule, dna, cell, tissue, organ, organism (human). [3]

I'll continue later.


[1] The wikipedia definitions for these patterns are: 
	still lifes, which do not change from one generation to the next; 
	oscillators, which return to their initial state after a finite number of 
		generations; and 
	spaceships, which translate themselves across the grid
[2] Patterns interact when the cells that form them change their state in the
	next time step, based on the state of cell(s) in the other pattern.
[3] This is a bit of a digression but an interesting thing to note is that these
	patterns did not emerge/arrive in this order. The organism that later 
	became a human came before certain tissues or organs that are now part
	of the human pattern.


### What is the meaning of life?
For me, my purpose is to create the maximally robust and happy pattern.